Core Steps and Architecture
1. VS Code Extension Scaffold

Start with the official Yeoman generator for TypeScript extensions:

text
npx --package yo --package generator-code -- yo code
This sets up the VS Code extension environment using TypeScript, ready for UI and backend logic.

2. UI Implementation: Copilot-like Experience

Use VS Code's Webview API to create custom, rich UIs. Modern React or Next.js (as static build) can be included in the webview for a dynamic experience.

Replicate the Copilot sidebar and chat popup interaction. Use local state or Redux/TanStack Query for React state.

3. Workflow: Step-by-Step Prompts

Implement a prompt builder flow for Replit, guiding users using UI cards, similar to Copilot’s suggest/accept/modify workflow.

Each “step” can dispatch commands to the VS Code extension backend or directly to an LLM, as appropriate.

4. Connecting to MCP Server and Client

Add configuration screens in the webview/sidebar to input and update MCP server endpoints and authentication details.

Use VS Code's workspace/configuration API to store user preferences securely.

5. Integrating Local Ollama Models

Provide a config area (in settings UI or a config file) for users to specify LLM endpoint (e.g., Ollama running locally at localhost:11434).

Use the Continue extension approach: manage a models array in a config, let users choose or modify models, and route prompt completions through the MCP server/local Ollama API.

6. Workflow Files: Read, Edit, Update, Delete

Use VS Code’s file API to list, open, modify, or delete workflow/code files.

Let the LLM suggest edits, which the extension can preview and apply.

Technology Stack
Frontend (UI): React or Next.js in a Webview (styled like Copilot)

Backend/Integration: TypeScript, VS Code Extension API

Communication: REST/WS to MCP server, direct fetch to Ollama LLM local HTTP API

Config/UI: Build user-friendly interface for MCP/LLM config and workflow management

Important References and Inspiration
The Continue VS Code extension: demonstrates model/config integration, local LLMs, chat UIs, and file operations, all within VS Code.

Copilot Vision and Edits: shows how advanced Copilot versions present inline suggestions and edit flows in VS Code’s UI.

Example: Ollama Model Configuration (similar to Continue)
json
"models": [
  {
    "title": "my-local-model",
    "model": "some-model-name",
    "provider": "ollama",
    "apiBase": "http://localhost:11434",
    "systemMessage": "You are an expert coder assistant.",
    "apiKey": ""
  }
]
Expose this model picker/configurator in extension UI.

File Operations and Workflow
Use:

vscode.workspace.openTextDocument

vscode.workspace.applyEdit

vscode.workspace.fs.delete

Connect these to UI actions and LLM outcomes.

For the best modern developer experience, build with TypeScript + React for the UI, use the Continue extension’s architecture as a reference for LLM integration, and provide user-facing configuration for the MCP server and local model setup. This approach will replicate Copilot-style UI and functionality, tailored for your advanced workflow needs.

